

18th Annual Review Conference on Atmospheric Transmission Models, 6-8 June 1995

FASCODE/MODTRAN/LOWTRAN:  Past/Present/Future G.P. Anderson, F.X. Kneizys , J.H.Chetwynd, J. Wang , M.L. Hoke1 2

L.S. Rothman, L.M. Kimball , R.A. McClatchey3 PL/Geophysics Directorate, Hanscom AFB, MA 01731  E.P. Shettle, Naval Research Laboratory, Washington, D.C. 20375 S.A. Clough, W.O. Gallery, Atmospheric and Environmental Research, Cambridge, MA

L.W. Abreu, ONTAR Corp., North Andover, MA 01845 J.E.A. Selby, Northrop-Grumman Aerospace Corp., Bethpage, NY

   Retired;   NRC Fellow (1994), currently at NCAR;   AFOSR Summer Research Fellow (Worcester Polytechnic Inst.)1 2 3

ABSTRACT    Beginning in the early 1970's, the then Air Force Cambridge Research Laboratory initiated a program to develop computer-based  atmospheric  radiative  transfer  algorithms.    The  first  attempts  were  translations  of  graphical  procedures described in a 1970 report on The Optical Properties of the Atmosphere , based on empirical transmission functions and1a,b effective  absorption  coefficients  derived  primarily  from  controlled  laboratory  transmittance  measurements.  The  fact  that spectrally-averaged atmospheric transmittance (T) does not obey the Beer-Lambert Law dT=exp(-%O/ffl), where % is a species absorption  cross  section,  independent  of  ffl,  the  species  column  amount  along  the  pathk  at  any  but  the  finest  spectral resolution was already well known.  Band models to describe this gross behavior were developed in the 1950's and 60's (see textbooks such as Goody  or Goody and Yung ).  Thus began LOWTRAN, the Low Resolution Transmittance Code,2 3 first released in 1972 .  This limited initial effort has now progressed to a set of codes and related algorithms (including4a line-of-sight spherical geometry, direct and scattered radiance and irradiance, non-local thermodynamic equilibrium, etc.) that contain  thousands  of  coding  lines,  hundreds  of  subroutines,  and  improved  accuracy,  efficiency,  and,  ultimately, accessibility.  This review will include LOWTRAN , HITRAN (atlas of high-resolution molecular spectroscopic data ),4b,c,d 5a,b,c FASCODE (Fast Atmospheric Signature Code ), and MODTRAN (Moderate Resolution Transmittance Code ), their6a,b,c,d 7a,b,c permutations, validations, and applications, particularly as related to recent upgrades.

2.BACKGROUND A history of the code evolution has already been compiled in a 1990 report entitled "Historical Brief of Geophysics Laboratory (GL) Atmospheric Propagation Codes for DoD Systems" , authored by Ruth Liebowitz, PL/GP Historian; a small8 portion of this report annotates the institutional name changes under which the work was written; acronyms include AFCRC, AFCRL, AFGL, GL, and most recently, Phillips Laboratory/Geophysics Directorate or PL/GP.  Because of the changing nomenclature, GeoPhysics Directorate (GP) will be given general attribution.  Written from the Air Force/Department of Defense viewpoint, the report emphasizes military applications.  However, of equal importance in the code evolution have been numerous applications by the general scientific community, those users who have found a reliable and mostly amenable resource.  As part of this larger community, the GP codes have been rigorously tested.  This international collaboration has been continuous  and  encouraged,  blending  individual  contributions  as  simple  as  errata  on  the  definition  of  Lambertian scattering (where, in fact, a factor of ! was missing), to continual re-evaluation against measurements over the dry Israeli deserts  and cold Canadian plains .  9 10,11

Accurate acknowledgment of contributions to an evolving program that is nearing its 25th Anniversary requires attributions beyond the already large authorship list.  The authors are only those contributors who participated as AFGL/GP employees during  the  years  of  code  evolution.    An  admittedly  partial  search  of  the  number  of  explicitly  funded  AF contractual contributions and their authors exceeds 35 and 100, respectively.  Therefore, no particular attribution listing will be compiled other than the accompanying references.

The largest set of external contributors is even harder to appropriately acknowledge; they have, via both deliberate and inadvertent  participation,  provided  direction  and  prioritization  of  component  elements  through  their  judicious comparisons  of  code  calculations  against  both  theoretical  and  experimental  (laboratory  and  atmospheric)  results.    Such contributions  have  come  from  U.S.  government  agencies  (Navy,  Army,  NASA,  NOAA,  DOE,  NSF,  NTIS,  etc.)  and government-funded corporations.  (More specifically, the Navy and the Army have supplied entire subroutine capabilities,

18th Annual Review Conference on Atmospheric Transmission Models, 6-8 June 1995 including the Maritime Aerosol Models and Vertical Structure Algorithms, respectively; see LOWTRAN 6 documentation .)4c The government  groups  have  been joined  by  the  university  and  industrial research communities  to provide  a  continuous stream of creative input.  Additionally, without implying finality, the international scientific communities (in no particular order, Canadian, English, French, Italian, German, Norwegian, Israeli, Russian, Spanish, Japanese, Australian, Chinese) have also contributed to specific and generic applications.  The depth of each collaboration often depends on the degree of overlap between existing internal and external concerns.  Some of these contributions will emerge in the text and references.  Those omitted are not less significant, but perhaps less well documented, often falling into the very important category of scientific interchange at the personal and collegial level:  discussions at international meetings, telephone calls questioning options, topical letters offering suggestions that get implemented at some displaced time.  The communities of users at all levels have proven invaluable to the open growth of this 25 year effort.

There  are,  of  course,  downsides  to  such  open  evolution.    The  AF  radiative  transfer  codes,  while  perhaps conceptually  and  scientifically  elegant,  are  not  particularly  user-friendly,  modular,  or  examples  of  state-of-the-art programming.  They can be justifiably criticized for their obliqueness and lack of documentation, both within the source codes and  in  their  backup  reports.    The  documentation  problem  is  acknowledged;  attempts  to  correct  it  are  underway (MODTRAN/LOWTRAN Scientific Report, in press; FASCODE Scientific Report, in preparation).  Additionally, there has been no singular mandate to re-approach at least this family of codes with the intent of bringing them fully into modern programming practices.  There is an actual threat in such an undertaking - the historic codes have been historically validated at each step.  A thorough recoding would require a parallel new validation, a difficult and time consuming task to reexamine applications over the entire spectral, spatial and platform range of the current capabilities.  From the research point of view, however, the codes were and continue to be scientifically evolutionary.  The choice has almost always been to continue to advance the scientific content rather than to revisit the antiquated programming techniques.  However, as much as possible, all new coding and much of the old is now structured according to accepted standards.  

At the same time, other agencies have undertaken development of new approaches to both line-by-line (LBL) and band model (BM) algorithms; see GENLN2  and LINEPAK  for comparison to FASCODE, or 6S , GOMETRAN  and12 13 14 15 APART  for comparisons to LOWTRAN/MODTRAN capabilities.  Both APART and GOMETRAN directly incorporate16 portions of  LOWTRAN/MODTRAN  so  are  not  strictly  independent  algorithms.    As  another  example,  LBLRTM ,  a17a Department of Energy-funded, FASCODE-derivative, line-by-line code has been restructured with the view of maintaining the expediency of the FASCODE line shape algorithm, while providing new insight and efficiency into optimized radiance, scattering and weighting function capabilities.  The very existence of the AF family of codes is strengthened by these new additions,  through  the  process  of  validation  and  authentication.    In  this  vein,  continual  participation  in  international intercomparisons  of  algorithms,  particularly  as  sponsored  by  the  World  Meteorological  Organizations  efforts  (ITRA ,18a,b ICRCCM ) to assure consistency and confidence, has been undertaken.  19

Ultimately,  this  history  of  the  AF  codes  cannot  be  literal.    Rather  it  will  include:  (1)  the  DoD  mandate,  a restatement of the need to pursue accurate and accessible atmospheric radiative transfer algorithms for both the military and scientific communities; (2) a brief description of the relevant radiative transfer physics, based on molecular spectroscopy in thermodynamic  equilibrium;  and,  finally,  (3)  a  more  expansive  description/contrast  of  the  current  AF  codes  and  their relevance to remote sensing and energy deposition applications.  The future development of the codes will depend to a large extent on external funding sources.  This is a relatively new approach, in contrast to the historic funding driven almost solely by the AF.  Some discussion of the impact of these directions will also be addressed.

3. DoD MANDATE Understanding  the  atmospheric  system  and  its  perturbations  (both  natural  and  as  modified  by  the  expanding demands of industry, agriculture, housing, transportation, etc.) is inherently important to man's successful functioning within his complex  environment.    The  total  atmospheric  system  consists  of  radiative,  chemical,  dynamical  and  geomagnetic interactions controlled by the boundary conditions of the sun at the outer extreme and the ocean-land masses at the inner extreme, that totality embedded within the solar/earth magnetic fields.  The separations imposed upon this system by the scientific and/or  military  disciplines  are  always  arbitrary.    The  boundary  layer,  lower,  middle  and  upper  atmosphere, ionosphere, magnetosphere, solar wind, and solar atmosphere comprise one logical set of divisions; this same subset can be recast as surface, troposphere, stratosphere, mesosphere, thermosphere and exosphere.  However, these are only subsets

18th Annual Review Conference on Atmospheric Transmission Models, 6-8 June 1995 that are crossed by others, each constrained by its own selected definitions (e.g. spectral, photochemical, dynamic and/or geomagnetic limitations).   

Because of both personal and  calculational constraints, individual atmospheric studies have inevitably narrowed their  focus.    That  narrowed  focus  is  continued  here,  targeting  only  the  radiative  properties  of  the  natural  (unperturbed) atmosphere for the electro-optical (E/O) spectrum between the ultraviolet and microwave wavelengths.  The altitude regime has also been limited  to  regions dominated  by the spectroscopy of molecular transitions.  Thus, the  thermosphere where atomic and ionic species begin to contribute has been largely ignored; GP and other groups have developed radiative transfer algorithms for this region (SHARC , ARC , etc).  [In fact, there is no logical upper altitude limit for FASCODE except20 21 for the necessary specifications of the appropriate atmospheric properties; however, the FASCODE line shape and layering algorithms, developed for the lower atmosphere, impose a time-penalty that restricts its usefulness, except for occasional validation tests; see subsequent discussion.]  Neutral molecular species, plus clouds and other particulates contributing within this envelope are addressed by representative physical and mathematical algorithms.  Not all available or necessary options are realistically modeled, but some provision is usually made, even if primitive.  For instance, of particular current concern is  the  lack  of  proper  cloud  treatments  for  high  spatial  resolution  images  (e.g.  as  measured  by  AVIRIS,  the  NASA/JPL Airborne Visible Infrared Imaging Spectrometer ) which must isolate cumulus towers underlying light cirrus against water22 and snow backgrounds.  

Other agencies  have  undertaken  the  complex,  computer  intensive  tasks  of  merging  the  radiative,  chemical,  and dynamical (and  geomagnetic  when  appropriate)  exchanges  of  the  fuller,  more  authentic  atmospheric  envelope  through massive four-dimensional (including temporal) modeling; see papers by Garcia and Solomon , Roble and Dickenson , and23 24 the Community  Climate  Model  authors   for  just  one  set  of  contributions  by  NCAR  and  NOAA.    However,  these  new25 capabilities continue  to  require  piece-wise  validation  as  well  as  optimization,  assuring  the  future  of  the  more  narrowly focussed radiative transfer codes. 

Having  now  limited  the  scope  of  the  AF  codes  to  the  E/O  spectrum  for  altitudes  below  ~100  km,  the  actual modeling  of  radiative  transfer  properties  of  the  atmosphere  and/or  the  design  of  observing  systems  to  operate  within  its envelope depends on one of two points of view:  (1) is the atmosphere an obscurant to be mathematically eliminated from the field of view  or  (2)  is  the  atmosphere  the  holder  of  the  desired  signature,  providing  unique  information  of  its instantaneous  state?    The  latter  view  is  that  adopted  by  the  passive  remote  sensing  community:    characterization  of  the atmosphere is contained  in  its  spectroscopic  signature.    The  first  view  is  traditionally  the  priority  of  the  surveillance community, separating  a  target  or  background  from  the  intervening  atmospheric  contributions.    However,  what  is conventionally a military preoccupation has also been an historic part of modern atmospheric studies (e.g. Earth Radiation Budget Experiment , cloud imaging from GOES observations , etc.).  This aspect is emerging anew as the capabilities of26 27 high spatial/spectral resolution nadir imaging  permit separation of surface albedo components (agricultural, geologic, sea22 surface, and pollutant), related to both local and climatic system understanding.  

The important distinction between the two primary points of view (atmosphere as contaminant or signature) controls whether instruments are designed to operate in naturally occurring windows (spectral ranges with low atmospheric opacity) or within strong (and hopefully spectrally isolated) molecular band systems, providing maximum information on the profile and variability of the examined species.  The AF codes provide tools for both types of implementation.  A simple procedure for E/O design would include: (a) selection of the basic problem - atmosphere as signature or contaminant; (b) selection of species, viewing platform, necessary geometric considerations, and electro-optical system characteristics to be employed; (c) selection of forward modeling algorithm for instrument simulation (line-by-line or band model), based on ease of use and confidence  in  achieving  required  accuracy;  and  (d)  selection  and/or  design  of  data  analyses  schemes  and  their implementation.    The  last  of  these  issues  rests  on  the  prior  information  content  estimates  and,  to  a  large  extent,  is  now mathematically constrained by the studies of Rodgers and colleagues .  That work, of course, has its own rich history28,29,30 of  contributions,  beginning  in  the  late  50's  and  early  60's  with  Kaplan,  King,  Du"tsch,  Twomey,  Mateer,  Dave',  etc. Remaining  questions  concerning  the  tradeoffs  among  spectral,  spatial,  and  vertical  resolution  balanced  against  required instrumental  and  algorithmic  accuracy  are  the  dominant  questions  for  the  scientific  community  as  embodied  in  each particular investigation and, ultimately, the successful interfacing and fusion of those separate investigations. 

18th Annual Review Conference on Atmospheric Transmission Models, 6-8 June 1995

Recognition of  the  scope  of  these  issues  led  the  US  Department  of  Defense  to  pursue  generic  development  of radiative  transfer  algorithms  in  the  early  1970's,  subsequently  appointing  the  AF  with  oversight  of  the  atmospheric component in 1978.  The program has been continuing since, all to the purpose of solving the atmospheric radiative transfer equations as accurately and efficiently as possible.  The outgrowth of the program is, at its simplest, a family of three codes: LOWTRAN  and  MODTRAN  (both  band  models,  BM's)  and  FASCODE  (a  true,  highly  optimized  line-by-line,  LBL, algorithm).  This family is being expanded under a variety of scientific and architectural umbrellas, all of which have the intent of facilitating  correct  usage.    Serious  attempts  to  optimize  timing  have  yet  to  be  undertaken,  although  both MODTRAN (especially when employing multiple scattering over large solar-impacted spectral intervals) and FASCODE (for almost any reasonable spectral interval) would certainly benefit from such research.

4. RADIATIVE TRANSFER 4.1  THERMODYNAMIC EQUILIBRIUM:  A closed system, in which no thermal or radiant energy is entering or leaving the system will be in thermodynamic equilibrium.  Collisional and radiative detailed balance will be in effect and the rate of excitation of lower state energy levels by radiative processes is exactly balanced by an equivalent radiative deexcitation of upper state  energy  levels  by  either  spontaneous  or  stimulated  emission.    Likewise,  collisional  excitation  events  will balance collisional deexcitation events.  The system will be characterized by a unique temperature with the population of the energy levels described by a Boltzmann distribution and the radiation field by the Planck distribution.  This description is a special case  of  a  more  general  case  of  a  statistical  steady  state,  in  which  the  aggregate  of  the  excitation  processes balances the aggregate of the de-excitation processes . 31

     The atmosphere, however, is not a closed system and, therefore, on a  large  scale, not necessarily in thermodynamic equilibrium.  On a smaller scale, particularly in the lower atmosphere, collisions occur frequently enough to maintain a local thermodynamic equilibrium (LTE).  That is, over sufficiently narrow thermal regimes (where the temperature and pressure are considered constant by some average definition; e.g. Curtis-Godson), the population of excited states may be described by Boltzmann statistics appropriate for the local ambient temperature (j ). It follows that the Planck function will describeamb the radiation field.   However, even when collisions are not frequent, collisional detailed balance may still be maintained, independent of the radiation processes, if the molecules do not travel far between collisions.  At the same time radiative detailed balance may fail.  Then radiated photons may travel large distances relative to the corresponding mean free path of particle collisions.  LTE will not apply to the radiation field and the distribution of populations will not necessarily be governed by the ambient temperature.  The population might be described by a Boltzmann distribution employing a non-LTE equivalent temperature (j ), specific to each vibrational transition, rather than the molecule as a whole.  LBL codes (suchnlte as  FASCODE)  are  typically  written  with  separate  parallel  paths,  for  LTE  processes  controlled  by  j ,  and  non-LTEamb processes which calculate the fractional contributions from j  transition populations, both as a function of altitude.  Fornlte altitudes below  50  km,  most  species  transitions  are  in  LTE,  permitting  the  elimination  of  the  time-consuming  non-LTE algorithm  for  many  calculations.    [Note  that  there  is  no  equivalent  non-LTE  capability  for  the  AF  band  models  in  their current formulation, thus setting an upper limit to suitable line-of-sight altitude configurations.  This issue is being addressed programmatically,  with  the  expectation  of  the  release  of  a  pragmatic  surface-to-space  non-LTE  band  model  in  the  near future.]   

Given the above description of detailed balance for LTE conditions within an atmospheric layer, what then is the source of the spectral line structure observed in typical electro-optical measurements (transmittance, radiance, irradiance)? The features, of course, reflect the discrete energy level transitions between molecular energy states, including rotational, vibrational and electronic  transitions.    If  detailed  balance  and  LTE  are  wholly  maintained  within  the  total  system,  no structure  should  be  observed.    The  presence  of  structure  indicates  the  gas  sample  is  perturbed  from  LTE.    There  is  an apparent inconsistency in defining LTE as a prerequisite for populating the local energy levels and then measuring signatures that indicate that the system is out of equilibrium.  To study the spectral line structure requires that radiant energy enter or leave  the  gas  sample  volume,  consequently  disturbing  the  energy  level  population  distribution  from  equilibrium.    For example, this perturbation is typically achieved in the laboratory by providing a radiating source at one end of the cell and observing the induced absorption or emission at the other.  Similarly, in the stratified atmosphere, the radiative properties of any layer will influence its neighbors, both far and near, depending on transparency and relative temperature differences. Couple in the sun and the radiating surface and the tools for remote sensing are at hand.  The thermodynamic properties of each local layer serve  as  a  source  or  sink  along  a  line-of-sight  for  the  observing  system,  or,  taking  a  more  global

18th Annual Review Conference on Atmospheric Transmission Models, 6-8 June 1995 perspective, each layer serves as a source or sink for energy deposition and exchange processes, leading to heating/cooling rate calculations and photolysis studies.

4.2  BASIC  LINE-BY-LINE  EQUATIONS:    A  set  of  primitive  radiative  transfer  equations  are  listed  in  Table  1.    The definition  of  the  absorption  cross  section  (* )  is  the  critical  parameter  that  differentiates  a  line-by-line  (LBL)  "exact"

oeradiative transfer code from  the more rapid band models (BM).   Historically, as  previously noted, the LOWTRAN band

model was the first AF-developed transmittance algorithm.  However, it is FASCODE that contains the critically precise calculations of  absorption  (optical  depth)  per  layer,  required  for  exercising  the  Beer-Lambert  law.    The  mathematics necessary  to  determine  the  appropriate  absorption/emission  rests  with  the  conversion  of  individual  spectroscopic parameters  related to molecular transitions (rotational, vibrational, and electronic), the magnitude of those transitions being5b,c governed by  lower  state populations and  the probability of  a transition occurring between paired upper and lower states, plus the statistically appropriate line shape factor.  The simplest absorption coefficient definition can then be written:

*  = S    f((oe-oe ),\Delta )

oe o.

where  S  is  the  line  strength,  f((oe-oe ),\Delta )  is  the  line  shape  factor,  as  described  below,  oe   is  the  central  frequency  of  theo o transition, and \Delta  the halfwidth of the appropriate line shape formulation.  The fundamental energy level difference between emitting (or absorbing) states defines the central frequency of that transition.  The temperature dependence of line strengths is calculated in terms of the appropriate Boltzmann distribution function:

where h is Planck's  constant;  c  is  the  vacuum  speed  of  light;  k  is  Boltzmann's  constant,  S   is  the  line  intensity  (fromo HITRAN  or some  other source) at the reference temperature, j ; and E is the energy of the lower state of the transition.o The remaining term, Q/Q , is the ratio of partition function to the reference value, governing the distribution of states foro the appropriate temperature and molecular species.  Fuller definitions for the spectroscopic quantities can be found in any of the HITRAN references. 

4.3 LINE SHAPE:  A spectral line centered at oe , is the convolution of a normalized line shape with the transition strength.o Briefly, there are three basic line broadening mechanisms, each of which causes the transition to be statistically displaced from the expected line center.  If the molecule is influenced by its neighbors through collisions, it will perturb the energy level spacing.   This  is  Lorentz  or  pressure  broadening,  intuitively  a  function  of  pressure  because  the  proximity  between neighbors and collisions increases with increasing density. The second line broadening mechanism is dependent upon both frequency  and  temperature,  governed  by  the  Doppler  motion  (velocity)  of  the  molecule  at  the  time  of  transition,  again impacting the apparent energy level spacing.  The velocity, of course, is dependent upon the temperature. The combination of Lorentz  and  Doppler  broadening  leads  to  the  Voigt  line  shape  which  adequately  describes  most  transitions  in  the atmosphere.  Exceptions to the simple Voigt line shape are accommodated by multiplicative / correction factors, particularly for  H 0   and  CO .    FASCODE  and MODTRAN both presume full Voigt line shapes, modified by appropriate /'s, over2 232 the entire altitude  range,  while  LOWTRAN  is  limited  to  the  Lorentz  pressure-dominated  line  shape  regime,  below approximately 40 km.  For a description of the altitude and frequency dependence of the line shapes, refer to FASCOD1B . 6c A related line  shape  issue,  of  general  importance,  is  line-coupling,  arising  from  a  dense  overlap  of  lines  from  the  same species which act in concert to apparently narrow the expected Voigt line shape; to maintain detailed balance and line shape normalization, the narrowing actually asymmetrically shifts transitions from the wings towards the line centers .  This33,34 behavior is exhibited by both CO  in the Q-branches of the 15 um band and O  in the microwave, plus other species with2 2 closely spaced transitions.  FASCODE and other LBL codes provide pragmatic accommodation for line coupling (CO  and2 O  only) as it  has  a  measurable  impact  on  nadir remote  sensing  by altering  the  apparent  weighting  function  maxima  for2 tropospheric sounding channels. 

The third line broadening mechanism is natural broadening arising from the uncertainty principle.  This is typically very narrow and usually plays no role in atmospheric calculations.  However two cases do arise.  For predissociated lines, such as the  Schumann-Runge  system  of  molecular  oxygen,  the  natural  halfwidth  is  determined  by  intersecting  potential wells, independent of pressure, but highly dependent on temperature through the Boltzmann populations.  The other is not

18th Annual Review Conference on Atmospheric Transmission Models, 6-8 June 1995 really line shape theory, but the impact of the magnetic field on magnetic dipoles, leading to fine Zeeman splitting, again exhibited in molecular oxygen and observable in the microwave region.  

It is important, given the basic equations of radiative transfer, listed in Table 1, to note that FASCODE attempts to solve for layer optical depth (Table 1:d) exactly, that is, to better than 1%.  Total transmittance (Table 1:g) is the product of the layer molecular transmittances, with the additional product terms of transmittance effects due to scattering (by both molecules (Rayleigh) and aerosols (e.g. Mie)) and appropriate continua, these being either layer or full path quantities.  It is in this sense that FASCODE also provides an "exact" treatment of the transmission calculation.  

4.4 BAND MODEL EQUATIONS:  The comparable treatment necessary to calculate transmittance using the MODTRAN band model is quite different, relying as it does upon the product of full-path, species-specific transmittances.  A band model fundamentally calculates  "full-path" quantities  rather  than  layer  quantities.   By  definition, then, it  cannot  obey the BeerLambert law.  Differences  from  the  transmittance  equations  in  Table  1  begin  with  the  column  amounts.    MODTRAN requires a total column amount weighted by pressure or density, not the individual layer amounts.  This weighting (CurtisGodson  or a variant) couples with the spectroscopic band model parameters (n/d and S/d, defined as the average number7a of lines in the interval and the average strength , respectively, plus associated continua to describe the extended line shape7a beyond the 1 cm  bin interval), to yield the path transmittance by species.  The total transmittance is then the product of-1 the  full-path  individual  species  transmittances,  along  with  transmittances  associated  with  scattering  attenuation  and  the continua.    The  MODTRAN  radiance  algorithms  are  directly  related  to  equations  1,  m,  and  o  in  Table  1,  similar  to  the FASCODE implementation.

5. BASIC CODE DESCRIPTIONS 5.1 COMMON ELEMENTS:  Briefly, all three codes share a set of common elements, facilitating intercomparisons and coding modularity.  These shared elements are meant to include everything except the detailed treatment of the molecular spectroscopy, the singular component which each code approaches uniquely.  Thus, default profiles for molecular species, aerosols, and clouds are shared, as are the viewing geometry, basic instrument scanning and filter functions, plus particulate and molecular continua, the latter usually in the form of cross-sections.  The basic viewing geometries for standard platforms (surface, aircraft, balloon, satellite) and observational requirements include full spherical refraction .  The default molecular35 profiles, while dating to 1986 values , can be changed to user-specification.  Note, particularly, that the CO  mixing ratios36 2 remain at 330 ppmv, rather than a more current estimate of 355-360 ppmv; the older value still serves as an internationally accepted fiducial, but can be simply changed with final release of the 1995 versions of FASCODE and MODTRAN.  The traditional continua  include  ultraviolet  and  visible  cross  sections  for  O   (Herzberg)   and  O   (Hartley,  Huggins,  and2 337a 37b Chappuis), IR pressure-induced cross sections for O  and N , plus CO  and H O continua.  The last two differ from the2 2 2 238a,b former in that they are essentially the sum of contributions from the far wings of individual molecular lines  rather than32,39 true continua  arising from  photodissociation or collisionally  forced homonuclear processes .  Nonetheless, the far  wing38b continua have been deliberately designed for flexible incorporation into all the codes.  In particular, the H O continua, both2 self  and  foreign,  have  been  adopted  from  the  recommendations  of  S.A.  Clough  (private  communication,  funded  by  the DOE/ARM Program).    Figure  1  shows  the  magnitudes  of  the  changes  for  the  spectral  range  from  0  to  3000  cm .    The-1 spectral properties  of  aerosols  and  hydrometeors  (including  fogs  and  rain)  are  also  shared,  primarily  as  developed  and described by Shettle and colleagues .  [As noted previously, external specific contributions have been supplied by the Army40 and  the  Navy.]    In  a  companion  paper  in  this  volume  (Berk,  et  al.,  1995),  the  newest  attributes  of  MODTRAN4  are described and include a simplification of the I/O for flexible/realistic cloud scenarios.

While the common  elements  are  not  identically  incorporated,  every  attempt  is  made  to  maintain  parallelism. Current exceptions arise primarily  from programmatic leaps, usually governed by  specific funding initiatives.  Examples include the  newly  corrected  geometry   for  near  horizontal  paths,  now  fully  operational  in  MODTRAN  (and  embedded41 LOWTRAN),  but  only  now  being  integrated  into  FASE  (FASCODE  for  the  Environment;  see  below ),  and  new48 MODTRAN UV  temperature-dependent  cross  sections  for  SO   and  NO ,  which  may  or  may  not  be  appropriate  for2 242 43 FASCODE.    Improved  temperature-dependent  O   Schumann-Runge   and  O   Chappuis  cross-sections ,  plus  a  higher2 344 45 resolution solar irradiance   (Figure 2, after R.F. Cahalan, private communication)  are being provided to FASCODE,46,47a,b as part of a joint DoD/DOE initiative to develop a more accessible validated LBL code for both agencies, FASE .  Also,48 while all three codes calculate thermal radiance with scattering, the mathematical algorithms are slightly different.  This is

18th Annual Review Conference on Atmospheric Transmission Models, 6-8 June 1995 particularly apparent in spectral regions of high opacity.  The  FASCODE algorithms employ recommended  linear-in-tau49 approximations appropriate for LBL calculations.  Currently MODTRAN emulates this approach with a modified version ;50,51 however, an improved band model algorithm is being developed by Bernstein and colleagues .  An even newer difference52a,b in algorithm implementation centers on the treatment of multiple scattering.  Historically each code has had slightly different two stream  approximations ;  the  LOWTRAN  and  MODTRAN  algorithms  differed  only  in  spectral  resolution  and53a,b LOWTRAN's need to implement a "k-distribution" function  to accommodate differences in band model opacity over the54 20 cm  intervals.  FASCODE, given its high spectral sampling, uses a simpler monochromatic two-stream "flux adding"-1 method, redeveloped  by  Isaacs .    With  MODTRAN3,  the  multi-stream  capabilities  of  the  DISORT  (Discrete  Ordinate53a Method)   now  allow  user  definition  of  the  number  of  streams, providing  increased accuracy  (approaching  20-40% for55a,b some solar cases) with a correspondingly larger increase in operating time.  While implementing the addition of DISORT to MODTRAN, a failure mode for layer derivative quantities was uncovered; this error, while not having immediate impact on typical line-of-sight calculations, initiated the development of a "correlated-k" distribution for the 1 cm  MODTRAN-1 intervals, comparable to the LOWTRAN7 formulation.  This is an ongoing effort, being funded by SERDP, the Strategic Environmental Research and Development Program.

5.2 MOLECULAR SPECTROSCOPY IMPLEMENTATION:  The final and most significant component of the codes is also the  one containing  the major kernel  of divergence among them.   Each code relies  upon a catalog of fundamental molecular constants, as contained in the HITRAN databases  and each code employs this information differently.  Correct5b,c handling of the detailed spectroscopy to convert these constants to transmittance and radiance is, of course, critical for an accurate radiative transfer code.  The original LOWTRAN , predating the HITRAN-like cataloging, initially incorporated4a empirical transmission functions and effective absorption coefficients at 20 cm  resolution.  Each version of LOWTRAN-1 was subsequently improved in both number of species and efficiency in calculation until, in 1986, the LOWTRAN 7 band model  was introduced.  Its band model does directly interface with HITRAN86 , employing a least squares fitting to LBL56 5b transmittance  calculations  for  a  variety  of  optical  depths.    MODTRAN  employs  a  two-parameter  band  model  at  2  cm-1 resolution , capable of more accurately following the temperature and pressure dependence of molecular transitions (energy7a level populations and Voigt line shapes).  Both LOWTRAN and MODTRAN also calculate direct and scattered solar/lunar contributions .    Finally,  FASCODE  is  a  full  line-by-line  Beer-Lambert  algorithm,  permitting  the  "exact"  calculation  of57 individual, overlapping molecular lines at the highest spectral resolution necessary to capture the collective behavior of any arbitrary set of HITRAN cataloged transitions.  FASCODE spectral accuracy, like that of other LBL codes, is essential for assessing  the capabilities  of any physically-based remote sensing system and/or parameterized band model.  HITRAN95 will be the basis for MODTRAN3 in its final revision.  Again, the companion paper by Berk, et al. 1995, on MODTRAN4 shows the impact of changes in the HITRAN database.

Because LOWTRAN originated the AF family of codes, it deserves more than a passing mention.  However, in spite of its historic  importance,  it  is  essential  that  the  scientific  community  acknowledge  its  limitations  and  adopt  more current and accurate algorithms.  This is often a difficult message since historic reference has often been lost and the results are frequently quite satisfactory.  The initial LOWTRAN accuracy and ease of use enabled the non-spectroscopist to perform adequate atmospheric calculations with confidence.  The message changed, beginning with LOWTRAN7, which adopted the more systematic band model described above.  Even with the improvements of LOWTRAN 7, calculations for paths for which the original LOWTRAN BM had been "tuned" occasionally deteriorated .  In general, however, LOWTRAN 758 has enjoyed an even larger audience and success, in part because of its transfer to the private sector (ONTAR Corp.) for commercial distribution for personal computer (PC) access , and, in part, because of its unique improvements, including59 thermal  and  solar  two-stream  multiple  scattering,  extended  ultraviolet  cross  sections,  etc.    The  combined  LOWTRAN distribution  (government-provided  mainframe  and  workstation  plus  ONTAR'S  PC  version)  exceeds  1300  designated recipients.

But now  LOWTRAN  7  has  been  displaced  by  its  progeny  -  MODTRAN  -  with  a  current  combined  (AF  and ONTAR) distribution to over 1000 users.  The basic advantages of MODTRAN center on the improved spectral resolution and compatibility  with  HITRAN  in  its  most  recent  issue  ('92  and  '95  for  MODTRAN2  and  3,  respectively).    The  most important generic message, however, is that most cases, all LOWTRAN versions should be replaced by MODTRAN.  A discussion of MODTRAN3's validation relative to FASCODE appears in Wang and Anderson .  Because MODTRAN345b is now undergoing external release in mid-1995 (along with its ONTAR PC version), its advantages are restated here.  The primary changes from older versions include:  (1) a new solar irradiance, at 1 cm  resolution (first suggested by B.-C. Gao-1 46

18th Annual Review Conference on Atmospheric Transmission Models, 6-8 June 1995 and developed  by  R.  Kurucz );  (2)  an  alternate  multiple  scattering  algorithm  based  on  DISORT ;  (3)  parameter47a,b 55a,b statement control  over  the  total  number  of  atmospheric  layers,  facilitating  user  control  over  the  degree  of  accuracy  in replicating atmospheric structure ; (4) new IR and UV temperature dependent cross sections  and (5) improved band model60 61 and radiance algorithms, developed and validated against LBL calculations .  Subsequent modifications will be made to52b MODTRAN as they become available.  For instance, a new measurement-based solar irradiance (from Shuttle measurements from the 1992 ATLAS campaign, expected in 1995) will be provided, along with the existing options.

6. MODTRAN3 APPLICATIONS Coupled with all previous descriptions of MODTRAN capabilities, MODTRAN3 calculations are demonstrating a breadth  of  unique  applications.    In  a  series  of  papers,  led  by  the  work  of  J.-M.  The'riault ,  preliminary  use  of7b,62a,b MODTRAN for analysis of moderate resolution interferometer data has been established.  These papers did not advocate using MODTRAN  alone  as  the  forward  radiance  algorithm,  but,  rather,  showed  that  MODTRAN  could  be  employed  to obtain the large derivative matrices used in physical inversion algorithms.  Because these matrix elements are calculated from determining the sensitivity of small single layer perturbations of each detectable species upon the full path radiance (by subtraction of comparably large numbers; see equations in The'riault et al., 1993 ), the near equivalence of the individual62 matrix elements to those derived analytically from LBL codes was unexpected.  This set of studies did not recommend that the iterative  least  squares  minimization  test  of  forward  calculation  vs.  measurement  employ  MODTRAN.    That recommendation can only be made after careful analyses of the impact of spectral resolution (and its accuracy) on vertical resolution and instrument signal to noise and other error sources.  Such studies are currently being undertaken.

A direct outgrowth of the sensitivity of the matrix elements was the suggestion that the MODTRAN layer-specific optical properties  (effective  optical  depth  and  transmittance/radiance  differentials;  that  is,  those  quantities  derived  from differences and ratios of adjacent full path BM calculations) were essentially equivalent to the LBL direct layer calculations. Given the near  linearity  of  this  sensitivity,  MODTRAN  became  a  candidate  for  flux-divergence  and  energy  deposition calculations.  As mentioned previously, the WMO InterComparison of Radiation Codes used in Climate Models (ICRCCM) had already established the basis for evaluation of LBL codes, so MODTRAN was tested against these evaluations.  Initial work by L. Kimball , L. Bernstein , and colleagues  has now confirmed that with appropriate modifications (an improved63 52b 7b,c radiance algorithm, implemented in MODTRAN3, and introduction of the mathematics to reduce spherical geometry to the "flat earth" approximation of ICRCCM), the IR spectrally integrated (0-3000 cm ) cooling rates for H O, CO , and O  fall-1 2 2 3 within the range of the LBL codes participating in the initial studies.  

Two specific examples of a newer ICRCCM comparison (R. Ellingson, private communication) for MODTRAN3 and FASCODE  are  provided  in  Figures  3a/b;  the  measurements  are  from  the  AERI ,  a  well-calibrated,  surface-based19b interferometer developed by the Univ. of Wisconsin.  In each case the results have been degraded to 10 cm  resolution and-1 subsequently compared to the ICRCCM standard radiative transfer model:  LBLRTM .  Table 2 shows the statistical level17b of agreement for Case 4, chosen for representation here because it was a completely blind test.  While the statistics appear to slightly favor  FASCODE  over  LBLRTM,  in  general  (and  for  the  4  ICRCCM  cases),  LBLRTM  and  FASCODE  are relatively indistinguishable, although the DOE-funded effort has made much progress in both computational efficiency and upgraded spectral  sampling  (resulting  in  improvements  to  better  than  1% ,  not  distinguishable  on  this  scale.    This17b agreement is not unreasonable in that both codes have a common lineage.  The important aspect is that these two line-byline codes (and the next generation, FASE) share the best agreement with the ICRCCM measurement set, approximately 2-3% mean difference and 4-6% rms difference (with values beyond 2400 cm  dropped because of extremely low S/N).-1 The comparable statistics for MODTRAN are approximately twice as large, 5-10% mean and 6-12% rms.  The difference in the statistical errors between MODTRAN and the line-by-line codes can also be seen in any direct comparison of their calculations,  whether  in  transmittance  or  radiance;  MODTRAN  residuals  are  usually  within  a  few  percent  of  exact calculations, and every attempt is being made to reduce this magnitude; again see the companion paper, Berk et al., 1995).

Another  recent  example  of  validation  of  both  FASCODE  and  MODTRAN  also  employs  a  Univ.  of  Wisconsin measurement set derived from their airborne instrument:  HIS .  Figure 4 shows just a small spectral range (2000-270018b cm ) of a measurement taken from the NASA ER-2 over the Eastern Pacific.  This spectral band has been chosen because-1 it demonstrates the overlap in the thermal and solar Planck functions.  The residual between measurement and FASCODE longward of 2400 cm  is due to reflected solar contributions.  Putting in a minimum surface albedo of 0.05 and employing-1

18th Annual Review Conference on Atmospheric Transmission Models, 6-8 June 1995 the MODTRAN solar capability reduces this residual between measurement and model almost completely.  The virtue of having a single model with full thermal and solar radiation fields is quite apparent.

Given this success and general agreement with the LBL spectral cooling rate distributions for H O calculated by2 Clough et al. , a more general energy deposition study has been undertaken .  Again, the "flat earth" assumption has been64 65 maintained but otherwise a preliminary version of MODTRAN3 (missing only the new solar irradiance and the DISORT algorithm) was used for all calculations.  The code was run from 0 to 50,000 cm  in two modes:  (1) radiance with single-1 scattering (which includes both thermal and solar sources), and (2) direct solar irradiance.  Figure 5 provides a typical pair of up- and down-welling radiances for the full path at 15 km, as might be measured from an aircraft flying at the tropical tropopause.  The direct solar contribution is omitted and the assumed surface albedo is 0.1.  Similar radiance calculations were done for 4 quadrature angles at each of 60 layer boundaries to approximate the 2! fluxes while the approximations for  daily  averaged  solar  insolation  were  based  upon  a  single  solar  incidence  angle  weighted  for  day  of  year  (120)  and latitude (tropical, 15N) .   The  combined results for both direct solar heating and thermal  heating/cooling can be  seen in66 Figure 6, at a degraded  spectral  resolution  of  50  cm .    Note  that  the  calculations  were  first  done  at  1  cm   intervals,-1 -1 providing  much  more  spectral  detail  than  actually  shown.    Dashed  contours  and  negative  values  (mK/day/cm )  denote-1 heating while  solid contours (and positive  values)  denote cooling.   Obviously many (over 300) MODTRAN calculations were required to yield the energy budget in Figure 6, representing only one very complex application of the AF codes.  An actual energy budget as determined from measurement, would also be the end result of complex sets of integrated data and spectral syntheses, no single instrument being able to provide the spectrally appropriate up- and down-welling contributions over the entire spectral range.  Of course, this preliminary demonstration can only begin to provide estimates of sensitivities, even when validating data are available.  

7. DISCUSSION/CONCLUSIONS  

Figure  6  required  producing  two  different  energy  budgets,  one  related  directly  to  the  solar  Planck  function (~5500 K) as a source, the other generated primarily from the Planck function associated with the tropical surface (300 K)

- -

and  the  accompanying  temperature profile  with j <300 K.    Most  of  the  cooling,  then, takes place in the 0 - 3000 cmamb

- -1

range, encompassing the thermal Planck function, and is due to the presence of the CO  15 um (centered at 666 cm ) and2 -1 O  9.6 um (near 1040 cm ) bands.  The combination of maximum cooling occurs at the stratopause where the spectrally3 -1 integrated CO  and O  cooling between 0 and 3000 cm  amounts to about 13 K/day, 10 K from CO  and 3 K from O . The2 3 2 3-1

- - -

tropospheric  radiative  cooling  over  the  same  spectral  range  derives  primarily  from  H O  bands,  yielding  an  integrated  3-2 4 K/day.  All of these values agree well with those found in the ICRCCM-related studies .  The maximum cooling

- 19,49,52b,64

(loss of energy within the layer) for the clear sky can be expected to occur where the temperature is high and the opacity low,  the  configuration  at  the  stratopause.    The  mesopause  heating  values  are  only  coarse  estimates  of  the  appropriate radiative forcing in that MODTRAN3 does not include important non-LTE effects.  The heating at the tropopause, on the other hand, is a relatively realistic representation, matching the ICRCCM values very well in spite of incorporating only single scattering.

The prior discussion  has  centered  on  the  thermal  radiation  and  its  relative  cooling  and  heating.    Additional discussion could be provided on the role of green house gases (HNO , CFC-11 and -12, O , and CO ) in the spectral range3 3 2 between 500 and 3000 cm , readily apparent in Figure 6.  Preliminary comparisons again show excellent agreement with-1 CFC forcing as calculated by Briegleb , but further discussion requires higher spectral resolution than that presented here.67

Switching to the calculations of direct and scattered solar irradiance as a heating source, one must look primarily at the frequencies  between  3000  and  50,000  cm ,  encompassing  the  maximum  in  the  solar  Planck  function.    Ozone-1 predominates as the heating agent, particularly in the UV between 30,000 and 50,000 cm , the site of the weak Huggins-1 and strong Hartley bands.  Both lead to dissociation of O , with subsequent direct heating of approximately 12-13 K/day,3

-

maximizing at the stratopause, again in agreement with the ICRCCM-related studies.  These values effectively balance the IR cooling  at the same altitudes.  The much weaker O  Chappuis bands (.45-.7 um or 14,000-22,000 cm ) contributes a3 -1 significantly smaller but discernible heating in the middle stratosphere.

The tropospheric solar heating sources for the clear sky are due primarily to the water vapor bands, systematically observable between the near IR (3500 cm ) through the visible (18,000 cm ).  This tropospheric heat source is not sufficient-1 -1

18th Annual Review Conference on Atmospheric Transmission Models, 6-8 June 1995 to balance the thermal cooling, at least for this set of calculations.  Such radiative imbalance is one driving mechanism for atmospheric dynamics and overturning.  However, part of the imbalance could be due to the approximation of the solar day integral.   According to Cogley and  Borucki  the technique of choosing  the mean solar angle and multiplying by a  daily68 weighting factor can lead to relatively large errors.  This error could also arise because of the assumption of single scattering for solar  irradiance,  rather  than  the  more  realistic  (  20%  or  greater)  contributions  of  multiple  scattering.    The  multiple scattering capability, when implemented, will provide a more correct estimate, but will also impose major time penalties not warranted for this "proof-of-concept" study. 

Separating and/or isolating the regions of optimum heating and cooling as a function of both altitude and frequency provides  the  research  community  with  an  important  tool  for  recognizing  the  potential  impact  of  any  natural  or  artificial contaminant.    Similar  studies  can  be  done  for  clouds  and  aerosol  loading  (for  instance,  tropical  cirrus  and  the  Pinatubo eruption, respectively).  However , before such isolated studies can be extended to the global environment, MODTRAN3 must become  highly  optimized  and  vectorized.    Even  this  very  rapid  band  model  (running  full  path,  full  frequency transmittance and radiance calculations in tens of  seconds)  is  inordinately slow when forced to undertake the many runs necessary  for  flux  divergence  energy  budgets.    Microwave  and  laser  applications,  along  with  higher  spectral  resolution interferometer data (for instance, HIS and AERI ) will continue to require the capabilities of LBL codes, as will the initial18b assessments of physical remote sensing algorithms currently being developed.

Table2:ICRCCMStatistics FASCODE,MODTRAN ======================================================================= CODE Case1/50.862Wm st Case2/38.111Wm st

-2 -1 -2 -1

diffmeanrmsLBL diffmeanrmsLBL ======================================================================= LBLRTM(R) -.274-.1121.230 -.09-.0360.510

FASCODE(R) -.141-.0581.24.18 .003.0010.49.15 (%)LBL* 0.005.470 1.064.240 (%)FAS* 0.505.651.8 2.094.963.5

MODTRAN(R) .378.1541.48.79 .452.184.741.665 (%)MOD* 2.518.194.7 5.3710.68.6 (%)MOD+ 1.677.574.8 4.169.848.5 (%)MOD3 2.067.985.2 5.1711.49.8

======================================================================= CODE Case3/31.466Wm st Case4/37.144Wm st

-2 -1 -2 -1

diffmeanrmsLBL diffmeanrmsLBL ======================================================================= LBLRTM(R) -.574-.234.6160 -.838-.342.8310

FASCODE(R) -.533-.218.587.115 -.736-.300.805.147 (%)LBL* -2.904.940 -2.804.050 (%)FAS* -2.393.793.2 -2.012.782.9

MODTRAN(R) -.227-.093.664.498 -.366-.149.822.640 (%)MOD* .737.438.7 0.406.247.4 (%)MOD+ -0.627.128.8 -0.636.277.3 (%)MOD3 0.597.6710.1 -0.086.608.2

=======================================================================LBLTRM is the DOE Standard Reference Line-by-Line Code, related to FASCODE; see discussion * indicates MOD2 (%) statistics truncated at 2400 cm-1 + indicates MOD3 with m.s., truncated statistics 3 indicates MOD3 w/o m.s., truncated statistics R indicates units of W m  st-2 -1

18th Annual Review Conference on Atmospheric Transmission Models, 6-8 June 1995 ACKNOWLEDGEMENT:    This  work  was  partially  supported  by  the  Strategic  Environmental  Research  and  Development  Program (SERDP)  and  the  1994  AFOSR  Summer  Research  Fellow  Program.    This  paper  is  derived  from  G.P.  Anderson,  et  al.,  1995,  as  first published in Passive Infrared Remote Sensing of Clouds and the Atmosphere II, David K. Lynch, Editor, Proc. SPIE 2309, 170-183, 1994. The contributions of Julia Vail to the production of this manuscript are greatly appreciated.

18th Annual Review Conference on Atmospheric Transmission Models, 6-8 June 1995                                                               FIGURE   CAPTIONS Figure 1: Changes made in the H O continuum, based on the recommendations of S.A. Clough (private communication), developed under2the DOE/ARM Program.

Figure2: New solar irradiance, after Kurucz ; the upper curve is the original LOWTRAN 7 irradiance.  Figure supplied by R. Cahalan,47a,bNASA. Figure 3: Preliminary ICRCCM radiance comparison for CASE 4 (AERI up-looking measurement and FASCODE simulation, both at 10cm  resolution, broken into two spectral segments to show full range; data as provided by R. Ellingson, University of Maryland.  The

-1

percent  residuals  appear  on  the  left  for  FASCODE,  LBLTRM  (the  adopted  standard,  as  developed  for  ARM),  MODTRAN2,  andMODTRAN3.  See Table 2 for full statistical comparisons.

Figure 4:  Preliminary  ITRA94  radiance  comparison  (HIS  nadir  measurement  from  20  km  and  FASCODE/right,  MODTRAN/leftsimulations);  data  as  given  by  Noelle  Scott,  CNRS.  FASCODE  resolution  has  been  matched  to  the  instrument,  while  the  MODTRAN comparison necessitated degrading the data to MODTRAN resolution (2 cm ).  The residuals are in the lower plots.  Note that the addition-1of a surface albedo and solar scattering reduces the residual between 2400 and 2600 cm  to about zero.  FASCODE currently has no solar

-1

capability.

Figure 5: Up- and down-welling direct and single scattered radiances for both the thermal and solar regimes.  The direct solar contributionis not included.  The surface albedo is 0.1.  The two strong CO  bands at 15 and 4.3 um are optically thick and, therefore, both the up and

2down views converge to a radiance commensurate with  i  at 15 km.  The visible H O bands are seen primarily in absorption of theamb 2reflected solar irradiance.

Figure 6:  The figures represent the  total radiant energy budget  for the tropical atmosphere  at equinox in mK/day/cm .  Solid contours-1indicate cooling; dashed contours indicate heating. The magnitudes of the contours are indicated by the grey scale.  Values above 0.1 mb (~60 km) may be ignored.

18th Annual Review Conference on Atmospheric Transmission Models, 6-8 June 1995

8.  REFERENCES 1a. McClatchey, R.A., R.W. Fenn, J.E.A. Selby, F.E. Volz, and J.S. Garing, Optical Properties of the Atmosphere, AFCRL-70-0527, (ADA715270), 1970.

1b. McClatchey, R.A., R.W. Fenn, J.E.A. Selby, F.E. Volz, and J.S. Garing, Optical Properties of the Atmosphere (3rd Edition), AFCRL-72-0497, (AD A753075), 1972. 2. Goody, R.M., Atmospheric Radiation, I: Theoretical Basis, Clarendon Press, Oxford, England, 1964.3. Goody, R.M. and Y.L. Yung, Atmospheric Radiation:  Theoretical Basis (Second Edition), Oxford University Press, New York, N.Y., 1989. 4a. Selby, J.E.A. and R.A. McClatchey, Atmospheric Transmittance from 0.25 to 28.5 um:  Computer Code LOWTRAN 2, AFCRL-TR-72-0745,AD 76371, 1972. 4b. Kneizys, F.X.,  E.P.  Shettle,  W.O.  Gallery,  J.H.  Chetwynd,  L.W.  Abreu,  J.E.A.  Selby,  R.W.  Fenn,  R.A.  McClatchey,  AtmosphericTransmittance/Radiance:  Computer Code LOWTRAN 5, AFGL-TR-80-0067, (NTIS AD A088215), 1980. 4c. Kneizys,  F.X.,  E.P.  Shettle,  W.O.  Gallery,  J.H.  Chetwynd,  L.W.  Abreu,  J.E.A.  Selby,  S.A.  Clough,  R.W.  Fenn,  AtmosphericTransmittance/Radiance:  Computer Code LOWTRAN 6, AFGL-TR-83-0187, (NTIS AD A137796), 1983. 4d. Kneizys,  F.X.,  E.P.  Shettle,  L.W.  Abreu,  J.H.  Chetwynd,  G.P.  Anderson,  W.O.  Gallery,  J.E.A.  Selby,  S.A.  Clough,  Users  Guide  toLOWTRAN 7, AFGL-TR-88-0177, (NTIS AD A206773), 1988. 5a. McClatchey,  R.A.,  W.S.  Benedict,  S.A.  Clough,  D.E.  Burch,  R.F.  Calfee,  K.  Fox,  L.S.  Rothman,  J.S.  Garing,  AFCRL  AtmosphericAbsorption Line Parameters Compilation, AFCRL-TR-0096, 1973. 5b. Rothman, L.S., et al., The HITRAN Database:  1986 Edition, Appl. Opt., 26, 4058-4097, 1987.5c. Rothman, L.S., et al., The HITRAN Molecular Database:  Editions of 1991 and 1992, J. Quant. Spectrosc. Radiat. Transfer, 48, 469-507, 1992.6a. Smith, H.J.P., D.J. Dube, M.E. Gardner, S.A. Clough, F.X. Kneizys, L.S. Rothman, FASCODE- Fast Atmospheric Signature Code (Spectral Transmittance and Radiance), AFGL-TR-78-0081, 1978.6b. Clough, S.A. and F.X. Kneizys, Convolution Algorithm for the Lorentz Function, Appl. Opt., 18, 2329, 1979. 6c. Clough, S.A., F.X. Kneizys, L.S. Rothman,, W.O. Gallery, Atmospheric Spectral Transmittance and Radiance:  FASCODE 1B, Proc. ofSPIE, 277, Atm. Transm., 1981. 6d. Chetwynd, J.G., J. Wang, G.P. Anderson, FASCODE:  An Update and Applications in Atmospheric Remote Sensing, Proc. of SPIE, 2266,Optical Spectroscopic Techniques for Atmospheric Research, 1994. 7a. Berk, A., L.S. Bernstein, D.C. Robertson, MODTRAN:  A Moderate Resolution Model for LOWTRAN 7, GL-TR-89-0122, 1989.7b. Anderson, G.P., J.H. Chetwynd, J.-M. The'riault, P.K. Acharya, A. Berk, D.C. Robertson, F.X. Kneizys, M.L. Hoke, L.W. Abreu, E.P. Shettle, MODTRAN2:  Suitability for Remote Sensing, Proc. of SPIE, 1984, Remote Sensing, 1993. 7c. Anderson, G.P., J.H. Chetwynd, F.X. Kneizys, L.A. Hall, L.M. Kimball, L. Bernstein, P. Acharya, A. Berk, D.C. Robertson, E.P. Shettle, L.W.  Abreu,  K.  Minschwaner,  J.A.  Conant,  MODTRAN3:    Suitability  as  a  Flux-Divergence  Code,  Proc.  of  the  4th  ARM  Science  TeamMeeting, Charlestons, S.C., 1994.  8. Liebowitz, R.P., Historical Brief:  GL Atmospheric Propagation Codes for DoD Systems (Revised Edition), Phillips Laboratory/GeophysicsDirectorate, 35 pages, 1990. 9. Devir,  A.D.,  A.  Ben-Shalom,  S.G.  Lipson,  U.P.  Oppenheim,  E.  Ribak,  Atmospheric  Transmittance  Measurements:    Comparison  withLOWTRAN 6, Report RAA/99-85, Technion-Israel Institute of Technology, Haifa 32000, Israel, 1988. 10. J.-M. The'riault, P.L. Roney, S. St.-Germain, H.E. Revercomb, R.O. Knuteson, W.L. Smith,  Analysis of the FASCODE Model and itsH O Continuum Based on Long-Path Atmospheric Transmission Measurements in the 4.5-11.5 um Region, Appl. Opt., 33, 232-333, 1994.

211. Roney, P.L., F. Reid, J.-M. The'riault, Transmission Window near 2400 cm : An Experimental and Modeling Study, Appl. Opt., 30, 1995--1

2004, 1991.12. Edwards, D.P., GENLN2:  A General Line-by-Line Atmospheric Transmittance and Radiance Model, NCAR Technical Note, NCAR/TN367+STR, Boulder, CO, 1992.  13. Gordley, L.L., B.T. Marshall, D.A. Chu, LINEPAK:  Algorithms for Modeling Spectral Transmittance and Radiance, J. Quant. Spectrosc. Radiat. Transfer, in press, 1994.14. Vermote, E., D. Tanre, J.L. Deuze, M. Herman, and J.J. Morcrette, Second Simulation of the Satellite Signal in the Solar Spectrum (6S): User Guide, 183 pages, 1994.15. Burrows, J., D. Diebel, H. Frank, K. Muirhead, R. Munroe, B. Kerridge, D. Pemberton, U. Platt, A Study of Methods for Retrieval of Atmospheric Constituents, Final Report, ESA 9687/91/NL/BI, July 1994.16. Cornette, W.M., Atmospheric Propagation and Radiative Transfer (APART) Computer Code, Vol. I:  Installation Reference Manual, PRAR-024-90;  Vol. II:  Users Reference Manual, PRA-R-062-90; Vol III:  Technical Reference Manual, PRA-R-077-90;  Vol. IV:  Softwarereference Manual, PRA-R-075-90, Photon Research Assoc., Inc.1990. 17a. Clough, S.A., Radiative Transfer Model Development in Support of the Atmospheric Radiation Measurement Program, Proceedings ofthe 3rd Atmospheric Radiation Measurement (ARM) Science Team Meeting, CONF-9303112, Norman, OK, 1993. 17b. Clough, S.A., P.D. Brown, N.E. Miller, J.C. Liljegren, T.R. Shippert, Residual Analysis of surface SPectral Radiances Between InstrumentObservations  and  Line-by-Line  Calculations,  Proceedings  of  the  4th  Atmospheric  Radiation  Measurement  (ARM)  Science  Team  Meeting, CONF-940277, Charleston, SC, 1994.18a. Che'din, A., H. Fischer, K. Kunzi, D. Spankuch, N.A. Scott, Report on the Intercomparison of Transmittance and Radiance Algorithms (ITRA), pub. IRC Working Group on Remote Sensing:  Direct Problems, Campaign and Workshop, Univ. of Maryland, 1988.18b. Knuteson,  R.O.,  H.E.Revercomb,  W.L.  Smith,  Forward  Model  Comparisons  with  the  High-resolution  Interferometer  Sounder  (HIS), Optical Remote Sensing of the Atmosphere, 1993 Technical Digest, 5, 1993.19. Ellingson, R.G. and Y. Fouquart, The Intercomparison of Radiation Codes in Climate Models:  An Overview, J. Geophys. Res., 96, 8925- 8927, 1991.

18th Annual Review Conference on Atmospheric Transmission Models, 6-8 June 1995 20. Sharma, R.D., A.J.  Ratkowski,  R.L.  Sundberg,  J.W.  Duff,  L.S.  Bernstein,  P.K. Acharya,  J.H.  Gruninger,  D.C.  Robertson,  R.J.  Healy,Description of SHARC, The Strategic High-Altitude Radiance Code, GL-TR-89-0229, (NTIS AD A 213806), 1989. 21. Lope'z-Puertas,  M.,  P.P.  Wintersteiner,  R.H.  Picard,  J.R.  Winick,  and  R.D.  Sharma,  Comparison  of  Line-by-Line  and  Curtis  MatrixCalculations for the Vibrational Temperatures and Radiative Cooling of the CO  15 um Bands in the Middle and Upper Atmosphere, J. Quant.

2Spectrosc. Radiat. Transfer, to appear in Sep., 1994.

22. Green, R.O., J.E. Conel, C.J. Bruegge, J.S. Margolis, V. Carrere, G. Vane, G. Hoover, In-flight Calibration and Validation of the Spectraland Radiometric Characteristics of the Airborne Visible/Infrared Imaging Spectrometer (AVIRIS), Remote Sensing of the Environment, 1992.

23. Garcia, R.R. and S. Solomon, A New Numerical Model of the Middle Atmosphere, 2, Ozone and Related Species, J. Geophys. Res., 99,12,937-12,952, 1994. 24. Roble, R.G. and R.E. Dickenson, How Will Changes in Carbon dioxide and Methane Modify the Mean Structure of the Mesosphere ofthe Mesosphere and Thermosphere, Geophys. Res. Lett., 16, 1441, 1989. 25. Williamson, D.L., J.T. Kiehl, V. Ramanathan, R.E. Dickenson, J.J. Hack, Description of the NCAR of the NCAR Community Climate Model(CCM1), Tech. Note NCAR/TN-285+SRT, 112 pp., Natl. Cent. for Atmos. Res., Boulder, CO., 1987. 26. Barkstrom, B.R.., The Earth Radiation Budget Experiment (ERBE), Bull. Amer. Meteor. Soc., 65, 1170-1185, 1984.27.  Menzel,  W.P.  and  J.F.W.  Purdom, Introducing  GOES-I:    The  First  of  a  New  Generation  of  Geostationary  Operational  Environmental Satellites, Bull. Amer. Meteor. Soc., 75, 757-781, 1994.28. Rodgers, C.D., Retrieval of Atmospheric Temperature and Composition from Remote Measurements of Thermal Radiation, Rev. Geophys. Spac. Phy., 14, 609-624, 1976.29. Rodgers, C.D., Characterization and Error Analysis of Profiles Retrieved from Remote Sounding Measurements, J. Geophys. Res., 95, 5587-5595, 1990.30. Marks, C.J. and C.D. Rodgers, A Retrieval Method for Atmospheric Composition from Limb Emission Measurements, J. Geophys. Res., 98, 14,939-14,953, 1993.31. Cannon, C.J., The Transfer of Spectral Line Radiation, Cambridge University Press, 1985. 32. Ma, Q. and R.H. Tipping, A Far Wing Line Shape Theory and Its Application to the Water Continuum Absorption in the Infrared Region:I, J. Chem. Phys., 95, 6290, 1991. 33. Strow, L.L. and B.M. Gentry, Rotational Collisional Narrowing in an Infrared CO  Q Branch Studies with a Tunable Diode Laser, J. Chem.2Phys., 84, 1149, 1986. 34. Liebe, J., P.W. Rosenkranz, G.A. Hufford, Atmospheric 60 GHz Oxygen Spectrum:  New Laboratory Measurements and Line Parameters,J. Quant. Spectrosc. Radiat. Transfer, 48, 1992. 35. Gallery, W.O., F.X. Kneizys, S.A. Clough, Air Mass Computer Program for Atmospheric Transmittance/Radiance Calculations:  FSCATM,AFGL-TR-83-0065, (NTIS AD A 132108), 1983. 36. Anderson, G.P., S.A. Clough, F.X. Kneizys, J.H. Chetwynd, E.P. Shettle, AFGL Atmospheric Constituent Profiles (0-120 km), AFGL-TR-86-0110, (NTIS AD A175173), 1986. 37a. Yoshino, K., A.S.-C. Cheung, J.R. Esmond, W.H. Parkinson, D.E. Freeman, S.L. Guberman, A. Jenouvrier, B. Coquart, M.F. Merienne,Improved Absorption Cross Sections of Oxygen in the Wavelength Region 205-240nm of the Herzberg Continuum, Planet. Space Sci., 36, 1469-1475, 1988.37b. Anderson, G.P., F.X. Kneizys, E.P. Shettle, L.W. Abreu, J.H. Chetwynd, R.E. Huffman, and L.A. Hall, UV Spectral Simulations Using LOWTRAN 7, in Atmospheric Propagation in the UV, Visible, IR and MM-Wave Region and Related Systems Aspects, AGARD-CP-454, 1990.38a. Gordley, L. (private communication; code written by E. Thompson, 1984) 38b. Herzberg, G., Spectra of Diatomic Molecules, VanNostrand Reinhold Company, pg.51, 1950.39. Clough, S.A., F.X. Kneizys, R.W. Davies, Line Shape and the Water Vapor Continuum, Atmos. Res., 23, 229-241, 1989. 40. E.P. Shettle, Models of Aerosols, Clouds, and Precipitation for Atmospheric Propagation Studies, in Atmospheric Propagation in the UV,Visible, IR and MM-Wave Region and Related Systems Aspects, AGARD-CP-454, 1990. 41. P.K. Acharya, D.C. Robertson, A. Berk, Upgraded Line-of-Sight Geometry Package and Band Model Parameters for MODTRAN, PL-TR-93-2127, 1993. 42. Lane, L., S.L. Manatt, R. Cageao, Private Communication in Advance of Publication.43. Schneider, W., G.K. Moortgat, G.S. Tyndall, J.P. Burrows, Absorption Cross-sections on NO  in the UV and Visible Region (200-700 nm)

2at 298K, J. Photochem. Photobio., A: Chemistry, 40, 195-217, 1987.

44. Minschwaner, K., G.P. Anderson, L.A. Hall, and K. Yoshino, Polynomial Coefficients for Calculating O  Schumann-Runge Cross Sections2at 0.5 cm  Resolution, J. Geophys. Res., 97, 10103-10108, 1992.

-1

45. Shettle, E..P. and S.M. Anderson, Ozone Cross-Sections for the Chappuis and Wulf Absorption Bands, to be submitted to GRL, 1994.45b. Wang,  J.  and  G.P.  Anderson,  Validation  of  FASCOD3  and  MODTRAN3:    Comparison  of  Model  Calculations  with  Interferometer

Observations from SPECTRE and ITRA, in Passive Infrared Remote Sensing of Clouds and the Atmosphere II, David K. Lynch, Editor, Proc.SPIE 2309, 170-183, 1994. 46. Gao, B.-C., The Presence of Terrestrial Atmospheric Gas Absorption Bands in Standard Extraterrestrial Solar Irradiance Curves in the Near-IR Spectral Region, Submitted to Appl. Opt., 1993. 47a. Kurucz,  R.L.,  The  Solar  Irradiance  by  Computation,  to  appear  in  Proc.  of  the  17th  Annual  Review  Conference  on  AtmosphericTransmission Models, 7 June 1994, Geophysics Directorate/Phillips Laboratory, 1994. 47b. Kurucz, R.L., Atomic and Molecular Data for Opacity Calculations; "Finding" the "Missing" Solar Ultraviolet Opacity; remaining LineOpacity Problems for the Solar Spectrum, all in Revista Mexicana de Astonomia y Astrofisica, 23, 1992. 48. Anderson, G.P.,  J.  Wang,  S.  Miller,  H.E.  Snell,  J.-L.  Moncet,  W.O.  Gallery,  FASCODE  for  the  Environment  (FASE):    Comparisonsbetween FASCODE and LBLRTM, DOE Report on FASE, 1994.  49. Ridgway, W.L., Harshvardhan, A. Arking, Computation of Atmospheric Cooling Rates by Exact and Approximate Method, Appendix:Cooling Rate Sensitivity to Layering and Vertical Integration Method, J. Geophys. Res., 96, 8969-8984, 1991.

18th Annual Review Conference on Atmospheric Transmission Models, 6-8 June 1995 50. Cornette, W.M., Robust Algorithm for Correcting the Layer Problem in LOWTRAN, Appl. Opt., 31, 5767-5769, 1992.51. Minschwaner, K., G.P. Anderson, L.A. Hall, R.J. Thomas, D. Rusch, A. Berk, J. Conant, Scattered Ultraviolet Radiation in the Upper Stratosphere, II:  Modeling and Analysis, submitted to J. Geophys. Res., 1994.52a. Bernstein, L.S., A Treatment of the Layer Temperature-Gradient Problem in Band Model Emission Codes, accepted for publication in Appl. Opt., 1994.52b. Bernstein,  L.S.,  A.  Berk,  P.K.  Acharya,  D.C.  Robertson,  G.P.  Anderson,  J.H.  Chetwynd,  L.M.  Kimball,  Very  Narrow  Band  Model Calculations of Atmospheric Fluxes and Cooling Rates Using the MODTRAN Code, submitted to J. Geophys. Res., 1994.53a. Isaacs, R.G., W.-C. Wang, R.D. Worsham, S. Goldenberg, Multiple Scattering Treatment for Use in the LOWTRAN and FASCODE Models, AFGL-TR-86-0073, (NTIS AD A173990), 1986.53b. Isaacs, R.G., W.-C. Wang, R.D. Worsham, S. Goldenberg, Multiple Scattering LOWTRAN and FASCODE Models, Appl. Opt., 26, 1272- 1281, 1987.54. Wiscombe, W.J. and J.W. Evans, Exponential-Sum Fitting of Radiative Transmission Functions, J. Comput. Phys., 24, 416-444, 1977. 55a. Stamnes, K., S.-C. Tsay, W.J. Wiscombe, K. Jayaweera, Numerically Stable Algorithm for Discrete-Ordinate-Method Radiative Transferin Multiple Scattering and Emitting Layered Media, Appl. Opt., 27, 2502-2509, 1988. 55b. Stamnes, K., S.C. Tsay, M. Yeh, Upgrade of FASCODE and MODTRAN to Full Solar Capability Including Multiple Scattering andSpherical Geometry, Draft Final Report to PL/Geophysics Directorate, 1994. 56. Pierluissi, J.H. and Maragoudakis, C.E., Molecular Transmission Band Models for LOWTRAN, AFGL-TR-86-0272, (NTIS AD A180655),1986. 57. Ridgway, W.L., R.A. Moose, A.C. Cogley, Single and Multiple Scattered Solar Radiation, AFGL-TR-82-0299, (NTIS AD A126323), 1982.58. Kneizys, F.X., G.P. Anderson, E.P. Shettle, L.W. Abreu, J.H. Chetwynd, J.E.A. Selby, W.O. Gallery, S.A. Clough, LOWTRAN 7:  Status, Review, and Impact for Short-to-Long Wavelength Infrared Applications, in Atmospheric Propagation in the UV, Visible, IR, and MM-waveRegion and Related Systems Aspects, AGARD-CP-454, 1990. 59. Schroeder, J., S. Harvey, ONTAR Products for the Environment, Bull. 5086899622, North Andover, MA., 1994.60. Conant, J., AURIC-M:  Atmospheric Ultraviolet Radiance Integrated Code as an Extension of MODTRAN, Aerodyne Final Report, in preparation, 1994.61. Acharya, P.K., Private Communication, 1994. 62a. The'riault, J.-M., G.P. Anderson, J.H. Chetwynd, Y. Qu, E. Murphy, V. Turner, M. Cloutier, A. Smith, Retrieval of Tropospheric Profilesfrom IR Emission Spectra:  Investigations with the Double Beam Interferometer Sounder (DBIS), Optical Remote Sensing of the Atmosphere, 1993 Technical Digest, 5, 78, 1993.62b. The'riault, J.-M., J.-L. Moncet, G.P. Anderson, J.H. Chetwynd, Remote Sensing of Tropospheric Profiles from Ground-Based IR Spectra, to be published in Proc. of 1993-OSO Annual Meeting, Toronto, 1994.63. Kimball, L.M., Calculation of Atmospheric Cooling Rates Using MODTRAN2, USAF Summer Research Project 1993 Final Reports, 8, pp 1.1-1.14, AFOSR, Washington, D.C., 1993.64. Clough, S.A., M.J. Iacono, J.-L. Moncet, Line-by-Line Calculations of Atmospheric Fluxes and Cooling Rates:  Applications to Water Vapor, J. Geophys. Res., 97, 15761, 1992.65. Kimball, L.M., Investigation of Atmospheric Heating and Cooling Balance Using MODTRAN3, AFOSR Summer Faculty Report, in press, 1994.66. Manabe, S. and F. Moller, On the Radiative Equilibrium and Heat Balance of the Atmosphere, Monthly Weather Review, 89, 12, 503-530, 1961. 67. Briegleb, E.P., Longwave Band Model for Thermal Radiation in Climate Studies, J. Geophys. Res., 97, 11475-11485, 1992. 68. Cogley, A.C.  and  W.J.  Borucki,  Exponential  Approximation  for  Daily  Average  Solar  Heating  or  Photolysis,  J.  Atmos.  Sci.,  33,  1347-1356,1976. 68. Cogley, A.C. and W.J. Borucki, Exponential Approximation for Daily Average Solar Heating or Photolysis, J. Atmos. Sci., 33, 1347-1356,1976.

18th Annual Review Conference on Atmospheric Transmission Models, 6-8 June 1995

TABLE 1:  DEFINITIONS   a. *  = absorption cross section, related to molecular properties,i pressure (p), temperature (

j), species (i) for a single layer (1)

  b. ffl  = column amount of absorbing (i'th) species = o`n dsi o   c. ds = path increment; n  = volume densityo   d. )  = optical depth = *  ffli i i   e. (  = transmittance = exp (-) )i i   f. (  = total molecular transmittance = O~ (  = ( ( ( ( ....mol i 1. 2. 3. 4.   g. (  = total transmittance = O~  ( ( ( (T

1 mol,1 continua,1 scat,1 aerosol,1

  h. \Xi (j) = Planck Function for temperature j

  i. !O^ = Solar (Lunar) Source Function   j. O' = Non-LTE Source Term     k. W = Weighting Function = (d( /ds)T

OPERATIVE EQUATION:   1. A^ = Thermal Radiance = o` \Xi (j) d(  = o` \Xi (j) (d( /ds) dsT T

AND FOR A SINGLE LAYER:  m. A^ = o` 

\Xi (j) d(  =  \Xi (j) [1-( ]T T

Finally, combining thermal, solar, and non-LTE sources with multiple scattering,one can replace the Planck source function with a more general source function:   n.     \Xi (j) [ J(),fl)   o. J(),fl) = general source function dependent on optical depth ()) andviewing geometry (

fl = zenith & azimuth cosines)

   = (3 /4!) !O^ ((fl) A~  [SOLAR]o + [1-

3 ] \Xi (j) [THERMAL]o +   

O'    [N-LTE] +  J [MUL.SCAT.]

MSwhere:

  p. 3  = single scattering albedo = )  /() +) )o s s a  q.

((fl) = transmittance from top of atmosphere to layer  r. A~ = scattering phase function

  s. J  = m.s. for both solar and thermal terms (complicated)MS

and other terms are as previously defined!!